My name's Jewel Willie and today is the 6th of June 2019 and I'm here with Mrs Elizabeth
Lewis at her home in Rheydar. Elizabeth, can we start first of all with your early life,
where you were born, where you grew up?
Oh, I'm close to 50 now.
Yeah.
Don't do a come on back.
No, that's all right. Yeah, just talk. That's fine, yes.
You know, you came from Liverpool, I believe.
I was born in Liverpool. I was there until I was eight when the war broke out, removed from there.
So you basically came as an evacuee, did you? Was that the term they used?
Yes, that's right.
To come to Mid Wales, right? Where exactly in Mid Wales did you come to?
Well, my twin and I came to Aberlebenny, which is a village on the side of my country.
To people my parents knew. Everyone had to take refugees anyway.
So that was a big house and they were very important people in the military.
And my other sisters, they were twins, went to a small holding near Clwyd o' Gwydarn,
called the Dollars. And they were there with three old aunts, very quaint old aunts.
They wore clogs and long black skirts and they were very old, very ancient.
But they loved it there.
Well, that would have been quite enough rooting, but what a lovely place.
We were all split up.
That's a bit unfortunate, I suppose.
And my brother up in Bangor with his school.
Right. But you all came to very rural settings then, totally different from Liverpool, I'm sure.
Absolutely, yes.
No bathroom, no water outside, no water in.
It was quite different. I actually liked to get the sticks and things for the fire to boil the kettle sort of thing.
And a little oil lamp, a little oil stove.
I remember something about that.
But not like today with the electric.
People today just wouldn't recognise places like that.
I'd like to go and see it now, see what it's like.
I'm sure you will. I hope you have the opportunity.
Right, so you were living in mid Wales and I believe at some point in your life you trained as a nurse.
Did you go back to Liverpool to do that?
Yes, I did. I was born in Birmingham, Liverpool.
Back there before, yes.
Back to Liverpool.
I certainly remember my own mother meeting you in the orthopaedic hospital in Gubowin in the very early 50s.
Yes, I remember that.
I was a very little girl there but Mum did tell me about that.
Yes.
So how, if I can ask, how did you come to marry Alan?
How did you come to meet him?
He was a blind date.
And I went on this Sunday afternoon to both my twin and her boyfriend and Nana.
It was friendly with him.
That's where we met.
That's where we met a bit.
Indeed.
What a lovely memory.
That blind date was obviously meant to be, wasn't it?
Especially in a lovely place like both.
You certainly came to the best part of the world, didn't you?
I think so.
For your early years and your early years of knowing Alan, of course.
Fine.
So when you decided to get married then, farming life wasn't really new to you at all.
You'd had quite a bit of experience.
And small holding.
Yes, we got used to the animals.
We could milk and do all sorts of things.
Right, so it wasn't just a big shock, having grown into farming life.
And of course they had men.
The women didn't really have to go out on the park to do anything like that.
Today, women all go out on their wives to help their husbands.
It seems that way, yes.
Do you have any special memories of farming in Kevin Kaido as you were living then?
Nothing that stands out.
It was just everyday things that we had to do.
We had to separate it.
We always milked.
We never bought any milk until we went to live in town.
We used to milk and separate it and make butter, churn and things.
The wives today all go out to work, don't they?
They seem to, yes.
And then you haven't got time to do your own work, never mind go out there with no electric or anything.
That's so hard to believe, isn't it? No electric.
We take these things for granted, don't we?
Yes.
Right, what about significant events in Raerder?
Is there anything you remember?
I remember Wilfred Pickles coming here.
He came to the railway station, am I right?
Yes.
I still remember something like that.
Otherwise just the usual things, the sheep dog trials and the carnival and all sorts of things that went on, didn't they?
Yes, and it's still going on.
And it's still going on, that's correct, yes.
Important events in the calendar of Raerder.
So you brought your family up in Kevin Kaido, just on the outskirts of Raerder.
What a lovely place to bring up children.
Kaido, Kevin Kaido, now Kevin we know means a ridge or a back.
Kaido, can you tell me a bit about Kaido?
I think Kaido was a saint, Kaido, up in North Wales.
And it's a tomb rest in one of the fields.
So I don't know if anybody buried in it or not.
Well, very, very probably, yes.
We have to get our landscape history group to find out more and more about that.
And I understand that part of the farm was an archway from Abbey Comheer.
Yes, I think that's the tomb.
Yes, yes.
And Kevin Kaido was also known as Kevin Kaido Hall, wasn't it?
Yes, it was.
Yes.
All right, well a lovely life moving from Liverpool to mid Wales.
What better place to move to?
I remember being very excited when we had hens and that was to chase them and do all
sorts of things.
We were sort of confined in Liverpool to do things weren't we?
Yes, totally a different type of life I would imagine.
Yes.
Well thank you very much for your time and sharing your memories and your experiences
and wish you all the best in the future.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Jill.